What are the Process of Natural Language Processing?. Next, the sense of each word is understood by using lexicons (vocabulary) and set of grammatical rules. However, certain different words are having similar meaning (synonyms) and words having more than one meaning (polysemy).It is the process of automatically producing text from structured data in a readable format with meaningful phrases and sentences. The problem of natural language generation is hard to deal with. It is a subset of NLP Natural language generation divided into three proposed stages -
 . Natural language generation (NLG) is a technique that uses raw structured data to convert it into plain English (or any other) language. We also call it data storytelling. This technique is very helpful in many organizations where a large amount of data is used, it converts structured data into natural languages for a better understanding of patterns or detailed insights into any business.As this can be viewed opposite of Natural Language Understanding (NLU) that we have already explained above. NLG makes data understandable to all by making reports that are mainly data-driven, like, stock-market and financial reports, meeting memos, reports on product requirements, etc.  There are many stages of any NLG;Content Determination: Deciding what are the main content to be represented in text or information provided in the text.Document Clustering: Deciding the overall structure of the information to convey.Aggregation: Merging of sentences to improve sentence understanding and readability.Lexical Choice: Putting appropriate words to convey the meaning of the sentence more clearly.Referring Expression Generation: Creating references to identify main objects and regions of the text properly.Realization: Creating and optimizing text that should follow all the norms of grammar (like syntax, morphology, orthography).
Role of NLP in Log Analysis & Log Mining. Natural Language processing techniques are widely used in Log Analysis and Log Mining. The different techniques such as tokenization, stemming, lemmatization, parsing, etc. are used to convert log messages into structured form. Once logs are available in the well-documented form, log analysis, and log mining is performed to extract useful information and knowledge is discovered from the information. The example in case of error log caused due to server failure.
What is NLP. Natural language processing (NLP ) is an intersection of Artificial intelligence, Computer Science and Linguistics. The end goal of this technology is for computers to understand the content, nuances and the sentiment of the document.With NLP we can perfectly extract the information and insights contained in the document and then organize it to their respective categories. For example whenever a user searches something on Google search engine, Google’s algorithm shows all the relevant documents, blogs and articles using NLP techniques.
Techniques of Natural Language Processing Covered . 