What is NLP. Natural language processing (NLP ) is an intersection of Artificial intelligence, Computer Science and Linguistics. The end goal of this technology is for computers to understand the content, nuances and the sentiment of the document.With NLP we can perfectly extract the information and insights contained in the document and then organize it to their respective categories. For example whenever a user searches something on Google search engine, Google’s algorithm shows all the relevant documents, blogs and articles using NLP techniques.
History of NLP. Let me take into account about the brief history of NLP, It started back in the year 1950 (yeah too old, :D ) when Alan Turing had published an article titled “Computing Machinery and Intelligence” which is also known as the “Turing test”. In that article, a question was considered, like, “Can machines think?”, since this question had small ambiguous words, like, “machines” and “think”. Turing test suggested a few changes, the question with another question that had expressed in unambiguous words and closely related. In the year 1960, some natural language processing systems developed, SHRDLU, the work of Chomsky and others together on formal language theory and generative syntax. Up to the 1980s, the evolution originated in natural language processing with the introduction of Machine Learning algorithms for language processing. Later, In 2000, a massive amount of audio and textual data was available for everyone.
Techniques of Natural Language Processing Covered . 
 . Named Entity Recognition (NER)TokenizationStemming and LemmatizationBag of WordsNatural language generationSentiment Analysis Sentence Segmentation
Named Entity Recognition (NER). 
 . This technique is one of the most popular and advantageous techniques in Semantic analysis, Semantics is something conveyed by the text. Under this technique, the algorithm takes a phrase or paragraph as input and identifies all the nouns or names present in that input. There are many popular use cases of this algorithm below we are mentioning some of the daily use cases;News Categorization:>  This algorithm automatically scans all the news article and extract out all sorts of information, like, individuals, companies, organizations, people, celebrities name, places from that article. Using this algorithm we can easily classify news content into different categories.Efficient Search Engine:> The Named entity recognition algorithm applies to all the articles, results, news to extract relevant tags and stores them separately. These will boost up the searching process and makes an efficient search engine.Customer Support :> You must have read out thousands of feedbacks provided by people concerning heavy traffic areas on twitter on a daily basis. If Named Entity Recognition API is used then we can easily be pulled out all the keywords(or tags) to inform concerned traffic police departments.
Tokenization. 
 . First of all, understanding the meaning of Tokenization, it is basically splitting of the whole text into the list of tokens, lists can be anything such as words, sentences, characters, numbers, punctuation, etc. Tokenization has two main advantages, one is to reduce search with a significant degree, and the second is to be effective in the use of storage space. The process of mapping sentences from character to strings and strings into words are initially the basic steps of any NLP problem because to understand any text or document we need to understand the meaning of the text by interpreting words/sentences present in the text. Tokenization is an integral part of any Information Retrieval(IR) system, it not only involves the pre-process of text but also generates tokens respectively that are used in the indexing/ranking process. There are various tokenization’ techniques available among which Porter’s Algorithm is one of the most prominent techniques.
Stemming and Lemmatization. 
 . The increasing size of data and information on the web is all-time high from the past couple of years. This huge data and information demand necessary tools and techniques to extract inferences with much ease. “Stemming is the process of reducing inflected (or sometimes derived) words to their word stem, base or root form - generally a written form of the word.” For example, what stemming does, basically it cuts off all the suffixes. So after applying a step of stemming on the word “playing”, it becomes “play”, or like, “asked” becomes “ask”.  Stemming and LemmatizationLemmatization usually refers to do things with the proper use of vocabulary and morphological analysis of words, normally aiming to remove inflectional endings only and to return the base or dictionary form of a word, which is known as the lemma. In simple words, Lemmatization deals with lemma of a word that involves reducing the word form after understanding the part of speech (POS) or context of the word in any document.
Bag of Words. 
 . Bag of words technique is used to pre-process text and to extract all the features from a text document to use in Machine Learning modeling. It is also a representation of any text that elaborates/explains the occurrence of the words within a corpus (document). It is also called “Bag” due to its mechanism, i.e. it is only concerned with whether known words occur in the document, not the location of the words.Let’s take an example to understand bag-of-words in more detail. Like below, we are taking 2 text documents:Above you see two corpora as documents, we treat both documents as a different entity and make a list of all the words present in both documents except punctuations as here, Then we create these documents into vectors (or we can say, creating a text into numbers is called vectorization in ML) for further modelling.Presentation of “Neha was angry on Sunil and he was angry on Ramesh” into vector form as [1,1,1,1,1,1,1,0,0] , and the same as in, “Neha love animals” having vector form as    [1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1]. So, the bag-of-words technique is mainly used for featuring generation from text data. 
Natural Language Generation. 
 . Natural language generation (NLG) is a technique that uses raw structured data to convert it into plain English (or any other) language. We also call it data storytelling. This technique is very helpful in many organizations where a large amount of data is used, it converts structured data into natural languages for a better understanding of patterns or detailed insights into any business.As this can be viewed opposite of Natural Language Understanding (NLU) that we have already explained above. NLG makes data understandable to all by making reports that are mainly data-driven, like, stock-market and financial reports, meeting memos, reports on product requirements, etc.  There are many stages of any NLG;Content Determination: Deciding what are the main content to be represented in text or information provided in the text.Document Clustering: Deciding the overall structure of the information to convey.Aggregation: Merging of sentences to improve sentence understanding and readability.Lexical Choice: Putting appropriate words to convey the meaning of the sentence more clearly.Referring Expression Generation: Creating references to identify main objects and regions of the text properly.Realization: Creating and optimizing text that should follow all the norms of grammar (like syntax, morphology, orthography).
Sentiment Analysis. 
 . It is one of the most common natural language processing techniques. With sentiment analysis, we can understand the emotion/feeling of the written text. Sentiment analysis is also known as Emotion AI or Opinion Mining. The basic task of Sentiment analysis is to find whether expressed opinions in any document, sentence, text, social media, film reviews are positive, negative, or neutral, it is also called finding the Polarity of Text.Analysing sentimentsSentiment analysis usually works best on subjective text data rather than objective test data. Generally, objective text data are either statements or facts which does not represent any emotion or feeling. On the other hand, the subjective text is usually written by humans showing emotions and feelings.For example, Twitter is all filled up with sentiments, users are addressing their reactions or expressing their opinions on each topic whichever or wherever possible. So, to access tweets of users in a real-time scenario, there is a powerful python library called “twippy”.
Sentence Segmentation. 
 . The most fundamental task of this technique is to divide all text into meaningful sentences or phrases. This task involves identifying sentence boundaries between words in text documents. We all know that almost all languages have punctuation marks that are presented at sentence boundaries, So sentence segmentation also referred to as sentence boundary detection, sentence boundary disambiguation or sentence boundary recognition. There are many libraries available to do sentence segmentation, like, NLTK, Spacy, Stanford CoreNLP, etc, that provide specific functions to do the task.
Conclusion. 
Lemmatization and stemming. Stemming and lemmatization are probably the first two steps to build an NLP project — you often use one of the two. They represent the field's core concepts and are often the first techniques you will implement on your journey to be an NLP master.Often, beginners tend to confuse the two techniques. Although they have their similarities, they are quite different.Image by the author, made using Canva.Based on these definitions, you can imagine that building a lemmatizer is more complex and more time consuming than building a stemmer. However, it is more accurate and will cause less noise in the final analysis results.
Keywords extraction. Keyword extraction — sometimes called keyword detection or keyword analysis — is an NLP technique used for text analysis. This technique's main purpose is to automatically extract the most frequent words and expressions from the body of a text. It is often used as a first step to summarize the main ideas of a text and to deliver the key ideas presented in the text.In the backend of keyword extraction algorithms lies the power of machine learning and artificial intelligence. They are used to extract and simplify a given text for it to be understandable by the computer. The algorithm can be adapted and applied to any type of context, from academic text to colloquial text used in social media posts.Keywords extraction has many applications in today’s world, including social media monitoring, customer service/feedback, product analysis, and search engine optimization.
Named Entity Recognition (NER). Like stemming and lemmatization, named entity recognition, or NER, NLP's basic and core techniques are. NER is a technique used to extract entities from a body of a text used to identify basic concepts within the text, such as people's names, places, dates, etc.The NER algorithm has mainly two steps. First, it needs to detect an entity in the text and then categorize it into one set category. The performance of NER depends heavily on the training data used to develop the model. The more relevant the training data to the actual data, the more accurate the results will be.Another factor contributing to the accuracy of a NER model is the linguistic knowledge used when building the model. That being said, there are open NER platforms that are pre-trained and ready to use.NER can be used in a variety of fields, such as building recommendation systems, in health care to provide better service for patients, and in academia to help students get relevant materials to their study scopes.
Topic Modelling. You can use keyword extractions techniques to narrow down a large body of text to a handful of main keywords and ideas. From which, you can probably extract the main topic of the text.Another, more advanced technique to identify a text's topic is topic modeling—a type of modeling built upon unsupervised machine learning that doesn’t require a labeled data for training.Multiple algorithms can be used to model a topic of text, such as Correlated Topic Model, Latent Dirichlet Allocation, and Latent Sentiment Analysis. The most commonly used approach is the Latent Dirichlet. This approach analyzes the text, breaks it down into words and statements, and then extracts different topics from these words and statements. All you need to do is feed the algorithm a body of text, and it will take it from there.Image by the author, made using Canva.
Summarization. One of the useful and promising applications of NLP is text summarization. That is reducing a large body of text into a smaller chuck containing the text's main message. This technique is often used in long news articles and to summarize research papers.Text summarization is an advanced technique that used other techniques that we just mentioned to establish its goals, such as topic modeling and keyword extraction. The way this is established is via two steps, extract and then abstract.In the extract phase, the algorithms create a summary by extracting the text's important parts based on their frequency. After that, the algorithm generates another summary, this time by creating a whole new text that conveys the same message as the original text. There are many text summarization algorithms, e.g., LexRank and TextRank.In LexRank, the algorithm categorizes the sentences in the text using a ranking model. The ranks are based on the similarity between the sentences; the more similar a sentence is to the rest of the text, the higher it will be ranked.
Sentiment Analysis. The most famous, well-known, and used NLP technique is, without a doubt, sentiment analysis. This technique's core function is to extract the sentiment behind a body of text by analyzing the containing words.The technique's most simple results lay on a scale with 3 areas, negative, positive, and neutral. The algorithm can be more complex and advanced; however, the results will be numeric in this case. If the result is a negative number, then the sentiment behind the text has a negative tone to it, and if it is positive, then some positivity in the text.Sentiment analysis is one of the broad applications of machine learning techniques. It can be implemented using either supervised or unsupervised techniques. Perhaps the most common supervised technique to perform sentiment analysis is using the Naive Bayes algorithm. Other supervised ML algorithms that can be used are gradient boosting and random forest.
What is Natural Language Processing(NLP)?. 
Importance of Natural Language Processing Applications. 
What are the Process of Natural Language Processing?. Next, the sense of each word is understood by using lexicons (vocabulary) and set of grammatical rules. However, certain different words are having similar meaning (synonyms) and words having more than one meaning (polysemy).It is the process of automatically producing text from structured data in a readable format with meaningful phrases and sentences. The problem of natural language generation is hard to deal with. It is a subset of NLP Natural language generation divided into three proposed stages -
Difference Between NLP and Text Mining?. 
What is Big Data?. 
Deep Learning For NLP Applications. 
Difference between Classical NLP & Deep Learning NLP?. 
Role of NLP in Log Analysis & Log Mining. Natural Language processing techniques are widely used in Log Analysis and Log Mining. The different techniques such as tokenization, stemming, lemmatization, parsing, etc. are used to convert log messages into structured form. Once logs are available in the well-documented form, log analysis, and log mining is performed to extract useful information and knowledge is discovered from the information. The example in case of error log caused due to server failure.
What are the Natural Language Processing Techniques?. 
Diving into Natural Language Processing Applications. 
Key Application Areas of Natural Language Processing. 